HARI SREENIVASAN: Good evening.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Judy Woodruff is away.
On tonight's "PBS NewsHour":
Violence continues
to trail Donald Trump, as
supporters and protesters
clash at the Republican
candidate's rallies.
Also ahead: The Chicago police
release videos
of 101 open cases where
civilians were harmed
by officers. We look at how that
may affect
the police department's already
strained relations
with the community.
Plus, New York chef Eddie Huang
talks growing
up in Orlando, Florida, as the
son of Taiwanese
immigrants, and how that's
influenced his
take on food and culture.
EDDIE HUANG, Author, "Double Cup
Love": I
think all my work is really
rebelling against
the matrix that's trying to
normalize us,
and create monoculture. And the
funniest,
most rewarding part about it is,
all I have
to do is be myself.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And it's
Friday. Mark Shields
and David Brooks are here to
analyze the week's
news.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: The
presidential candidates
are in California heading into
the last weekend
of campaigning before Tuesday's
primary.
And last night, campaign trail
violence followed.
Lisa Desjardins has the story.
LISA DESJARDINS: Police in riot
gear, campaign
hats on fire, and bloodied
faces, that was
the scene last night outside a
Donald Trump
rally in San Jose, California.
And, increasingly, it's the
picture of campaign
2016. Where one side sees
organized, violent
protesters, the other says it
all started
with the candidate himself.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
So if you see somebody getting
ready to throw
a tomato, knock the crap out of
them, would
you? Seriously, OK? Just knock
the hell -- I
promise you, I will pay for the
legal fees.
I promise. I promise.
LISA DESJARDINS: But, today, a
different tone.
Trump insisted he has pushed for
calm.
DONALD TRUMP: When we have a
protester inside,
which even isn't very often, I
say, be very
gentle, please don't hurt him,
take care of
him, if he wants to shout, if he
punches you
in the face, smile.
LISA DESJARDINS: Democratic
front-runner Hillary
Clinton reacted to last night's
violence in
a CNN interview today.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
And Trump has lowered the bar.
And now is
it a surprise that people who
don't like him
are stepping over that low bar?
I don't think
it is. He needs to condemn all
violence by
everyone. I already have. I will
continue
to do so.
LISA DESJARDINS: Neil Levesque
of Saint Anselm
College says the incivility has
risen on both
sides and so has the volume.
NEIL LEVESQUE, Saint Anselm
College: Well,
Trump certainly has escalated
the amount of
vitriol from the podium itself,
yelling at
reporters, personally attacking
them, personally
attacking judges.
This is sort of unprecedented.
And I'm sure
that it has raised the level of
disruption,
of amount of anger that's out
there. And I
believe it has contributed to
the bad situation
that's taken place outside of
some of these
rallies.
LISA DESJARDINS: It has happened
at many Trump
events since last year. These
are just a few.
But things escalated in March,
with a canceled
rally in Chicago, dozens of
arrests in Saint
Louis and a protester getting
punched in Tucson.
Recently, violence has turned to
more physical
damage, with protesters smashing
police cars
near L.A., items thrown at
police horses in
Albuquerque, and then punches
thrown on both
sides last night.
Larry O'Connor is a talk host
and conservative
in Washington. He says the
protesters are
blocking democracy.
LARRY O'CONNOR, Talk Show Host:
What we saw
last night in San Jose was a
group of American
citizens, peacefully assembling
for a political
rally, and they were violently
attacked. That's
anti-free speech. It's
anti-American.
LISA DESJARDINS: Conservatives
charge that
organizations on the left like
MoveOn.org
are behind the protests and
violence. MoveOn
has said it did promote and
print signs for
the Chicago protest in March,
but it insists
it is not violent and there's no
evidence
connecting it to violence.
But they blame Trump for the
escalation.
Karine Jean-Pierre is with
MoveOn.org.
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE, MoveOn.org:
He is responsible.
He is standing on stage, behind
a podium,
and he's applying for the job of
the United
States. And what he's doing is
saying it's
OK to punch a peaceful
protester. And this
is not OK. It is a problem. And
this is hatred
and bigotry and racism that he's
putting out
there.
LISA DESJARDINS: But Trump
supporters insist
they are the victims of hatred
from protesters.
Some see it all as something
more than politics,
but a kind of cultural anger
spilling over
at campaign events.
Again, Levesque:
NEIL LEVESQUE: The tragedy here
is that Americans
need to be able to talk to each
other. They
need to be able to listen to
each other, and
when you have civic events that
really cannot
take place anymore, it's really
harmful to
our republic.
LISA DESJARDINS: Today's Trump
rally at an
airport in Redding, California,
was notably
calmer.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We will talk
more about
security issues on the campaign,
as well as
the week in politics, with
Shields and Brooks
later in the program.
In the day's other news: U.S.
hiring plunged
to its lowest level in more than
five years.
The Labor Department reported
U.S. employers
added just 38,000 jobs in May.
At the same
time, unemployment fell from 5
percent to
4.7 percent, but that was
largely because
about half-a-million unemployed
Americans
stopped looking for work. We
will take a closer
look at the weak jobs report
right after this
news summary.
The hiring slowdown pushed
stocks lower on
Wall Street today. The Dow Jones
industrial
average lost 31 points to close
at 17807.
The Nasdaq fell nearly 29
points, and the
S&P 500 dropped six. For the
week, both the
Nasdaq and the S&P 500 gained a
fraction of
a percent, while the Dow lost a
a percent.
In Central Texas, the search for
four missing
Fort Hood soldiers intensified,
a day after
their truck overturned in a
flooded creek.
Five soldiers died, and three
others were
rescued and hospitalized. It
happened as soldiers
from the Army post were being
trained to operate
the 2.5-ton truck. Aerial and
ground crews
are painstakingly searching the
20-mile creek.
MAJ. GEN. JOHN UBERTI, U.S.
Army: Our priority
has been, since the first report
of this incident,
and continues to be the search
for our four
missing teammates. The entire
leadership team
is focused on making sure we're
providing
the support and counseling for
the families,
friends and soldiers as we work
through the
notification and grieving
process.
HARI SREENIVASAN: More than half
of the state
of Texas remained under flood
watches or warnings
today. A new batch of storms
dumped more rain
and worsened flooding caused by
waterways
rising to record levels.
Flooding is also wreaking havoc
in Paris,
where the River Seine rose more
than 18 feet
above normal. Many popular
landmarks across
the city have been forced to
close. French
authorities are also activating
a preliminary
emergency plan to transfer
government functions
to secure places if the river
continues to
swell.
Matt Frei of Independent
Television News reports.
MATT FREI: The statue of the
Zouave soldier
on the iconic Alma Bridge, but
when he's up
to his hips in the Seine, Paris
knows it's
in trouble.
"It's pretty impressive," he
admits. "Let's
hope the rains don't continue.
Otherwise,
we will have a catastrophe."
The water is already almost five
meters above
its usual level. That's still
three meters
short of the record set over a
century ago,
but high enough to force tens of
thousands
of Parisians to be evacuated.
The army was
quick to take people to safety.
WOMAN (through translator): It
scared me terribly.
I was really panicked. I have
never seen this
in my life and it's shocking.
It's really
shocking.
MAN: I'm really sorry. Closed
today. We have
to evacuate the masterpieces
that are in the
basement.
MATT FREI: The Louvre has been
turned into
a waiting room for nude
masterpieces evacuated
for the first time since World
War II. A quarter-of-a-million
treasures are all trying to stay
dry. The
water has left its mark on
Germany too.
This was Zimba Hamen (ph) on the
Austrian
border from the air, and this
was it on the
ground. The floods have left
nine people dead
here and the spring clean from
hell.
HARI SREENIVASAN: At least 13
people have
died in the flooding across
Europe in the
last week.
It was another deadly day in the
Mediterranean.
The Libyan coast guard recovered
more than
110 bodies after a smuggling
boat sank. Most
of the victims were from African
countries.
Meanwhile, in Geneva, migration
officials
warned of a new wave heading
toward Greece,
after a ship carrying some 700
migrants sank
near the island of Crete today;
340 people
were rescued.
JOEL MILLMAN, International
Organization for
Migration: Crete is opening up
as a kind of
a new destination. We have had
several hundred
in the last three days. We
understand that
they sail from Turkey, not from
Africa, and
that they fit the profile that
we saw from
the Balkan route most of the
past 12 months,
which is Afghans, Syrians and
Iraqis.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The European
Union signed
a deal to close the route from
Turkey.
In India, a police operation to
clear a protest
camp erupted into a volley of
gunfire, leaving
at least 24 people dead.
Thousands of demonstrators
had occupied a makeshift camp in
the northern
city of Mathura for two years,
demanding a
laundry list of political and
economic reforms.
The police approached the site
last night
on court orders to evict the
protesters. They
were met by gunfire, and a blaze
broke out.
MAN (through translator): A
police patrolling
team was in the area to check
the arrangements
for the anti-encroachment drive.
The encroachers
attacked them. Our
superintendent got injured
and later succumbed to his
injuries. They
had explosives, grenades, and
rifles, which
they used to fire at us.
HARI SREENIVASAN: More than a
hundred people
were injured in the clashes, and
some 370
others were arrested.
World soccer's governing body
says its top
officials awarded themselves pay
bumps and
bonuses totaling $80 million. An
internal
FIFA investigation showed
ex-president Sepp
Blatter and two others received
the money
over their last five years in
office. Blatter
got a $12 million bonus after
the 2014 World
Cup in Brazil. It's just the
latest development
in the sweeping FIFA corruption
scandal.
Meanwhile, the U.S. women's
soccer team can't
stop work to protest. A judge
ruled that the
world champions cannot strike
for better conditions
and pay, which they argue is
four times less
than their male counterparts.
The judge said
the team is bound by a no-strike
clause in
an earlier agreement with the
U.S. Soccer
Federation.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
what a dismal
jobs report says about the state
of the economy;
more than a hundred Chicago
police videos
released to the public; Mark
Shields and David
Brooks take on the week's news;
and much more.
The monthly jobs report may only
provide a
snapshot of the economy, but
that picture
in May was grim, and the photo
album of the
past three months is not such a
good look.
Just under 40,000 new jobs last
month, that's
abnormally low during this long
recovery.
But even if the numbers are off,
the last
quarter shows a slowdown, just
115,000 jobs
a month.
Let's break this all down with
David Wessel.
He's the director of the
Brookings Institution's
Hutchins Center on Fiscal and
Monetary policy,
and a contributing correspondent
to The Wall
Street Journal.
Thirty-eight thousand jobs,
everybody's kind
of stunned by that. Some of
those had to be
the Verizon workers and the
strike.
DAVID WESSEL, The Wall Street
Journal: Right.
It would have been twice as many
jobs if it
hadn't been for the Verizon
strike, but, still,
that 115,000 jobs a month over
the past three
months is much slower than we
have been seeing.
We have been seeing over 200,000
jobs a month.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And, as we
were talking
about, that the unemployment
rate decreased,
but it was the worst kind of
decrease you
want.
DAVID WESSEL: Right.
We like it when the unemployment
rate declines
because more people find work.
We don't like
it when people drop out of the
work force.
As I said earlier, about
half-a-million people
dropped out of the work force, a
lot of whom
were in the over age 55 group, a
lot of increase
in -- a lot of dropouts in the
high school
dropout class. So that's really
troubling.
And it reverses a trend we had
been seeing
over the past few months of more
people coming
into the job market.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, there's a
stronger correlation
between higher education and
unemployment?
DAVID WESSEL: That's right.
So, if you're a college
graduate, the unemployment
rate is about 2.1 percent in
May, the new
numbers out. If you're a high
school dropout,
it's half of what it was during
the recession,
but it's still 7 percent, much
higher.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And then when
you break
it down by race, there are wild
fluctuations
in unemployment that way?
DAVID WESSEL: Right. As always,
about -- unemployment
for black people in America is
twice that
for white people.
But I think what's really
important is here,
is that it's not that the
economy is getting
worse. It's just that it's
getting better
much more slowly. And that's the
disappointing
part. We weren't ready for this
recovery to
start losing steam.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Yes. When we
talk about
those chunks of time that we're
looking at
the jobs report, quarter by
quarter, and as
slow as this has been, do we
know if this
is a bad patch or if this is a
major kind
of sea shift in how much slower
our growth
is happening?
DAVID WESSEL: We don't know. And
that's really
the question.
Is this a few months of bad
patch and things
will pick up later in the year,
as happened
in the past couple of years?
People are saying,
the forecasters, for what it's
worth, say
that the economy should do
better in the second
quarter than the very lousy
first quarter.
But there are some worrisome
signs. Auto sales
have been weak. Businesses seem
to be squeezed
on their profits, and they're a
little uncertain
about what his happening to
policy, so they're
not investing.
So, it's really one of those
moments where
we could look back on this say
just it was
a bad patch, but we could look
back and say
this was an inflection point.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right, one
group of
people who study this report
this very closely,
the Fed, and they're meeting
soon. What does
this mean? Is this sort of
enough of an indicator
where maybe we shouldn't make
any changes?
DAVID WESSEL: I think that it
looks like the
Fed will not raise interest
rates on June
15.
The markets had been expecting
them to raise
rates. After these numbers came
out today,
the market has changed its mind,
and Governor
Lael Brainard of the Federal
Reserve Board
was pretty gloomy about what she
saw in the
numbers. So, the guessing now is
maybe they
raise rates in July, maybe they
wait until
September, but certainly not in
June.
HARI SREENIVASAN: There's a
sliver of a silver
lining here, which is the hourly
rates.
DAVID WESSEL: Right.
The only silver lining in this
otherwise dismal
report was that wages are going
up. Wages
have risen about 2.5 percent
average hourly
earnings over the past 12
months. And the
White House was quick to point
out that, if
you just look over the first
four or five
months of 2016, wages have been
going up at
better than a 3 percent annual
rate.
So, that is encouraging and that
is important
because it means that there's --
the labor
market is tightening and
consumers will have
money to spend, and so that's
encouraging
sign and one I think people
weren't expecting.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And is there a
distinction
between part-time workers
looking for work,
full-time workers looking for
work? How does
that fit in?
DAVID WESSEL: Yes.
So, one of the things that has
been disturbing
about the recovery is a very,
very large fraction
of workers by historic standards
have been
working part-time, but they tell
government
survey people, we really wish we
were looking
for a full-time job.
So, that number has come down
quite a bit
since the recession, but it
still remains
much worse than it was before
the recession.
So that's one of the worrisome
signs. We don't
want the recovery to run out of
steam before
all those part-time workers who
want full-time
jobs can get them.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
David Wessel
from the Brookings Institution,
thanks so
much.
DAVID WESSEL: You're welcome.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now: a major
release of
video exposing the police force
in Chicago.
The relationship between many
residents, the
police and the mayor has been
extremely tense
for months now, leading to
protests and suspicion,
especially after a nearly
two-year delay in
the release of a video involving
a police
shooting.
The city has traditionally
withheld these
kind of videos until
investigations were complete,
but, under pressure, the policy
has changed
and Chicago now appears to be
the largest
American city to release videos
showing potentially
excessive force.
Jeffrey Brown has our report.
And a warning: Some of the
images in this
story may be disturbing.
JEFFREY BROWN: It's a stunning
release for
its sheer size and scope. Today,
Chicago's
Independent Police Review Board
released scores
of recordings related to 101
cases involving
officer-related shootings and
other incidents
in which civilians were injured
or killed.
The videos came from dashboard
cameras and
other sources. They involve
alleged misconduct
in cases that remain under
investigation.
In one video, an unarmed man was
shot by police
after he allegedly caused a
disturbance on
a bus and struck a driver.
Another, shot on a cell phone,
shows police
hitting someone after arriving
at a scene
where there was open alcohol.
Today, Sharon Fairley, chief
administrator
of the review authority, said
the release
is part of an effort to make the
department
more open.
SHARON FAIRLEY, Chicago
Independent Police
Review Authority: These past few
months, as
the city has struggled with so
many questions
about policing and about police
accountability,
it has been clear that we all
agree that there's
a lack of trust and that
increased transparency
is essential to rebuilding that
trust.
JEFFREY BROWN: Fairley added,
though, that
the videos only show so much.
SHARON FAIRLEY: It's really
important for
you to keep in mind that these
materials may
not convey all of the facts and
considerations
that are relevant to an
investigation of an
officer's conduct.
JEFFREY BROWN: For its part, the
police union
called today's release of the
videos irresponsible.
Anger and frustration with the
police department
came to a head last year after a
video was
released showing a white officer
killing black
teenager Laquan McDonald. The
event occurred
in 2014.
Facing a firestorm, Mayor Rahm
Emanuel sacked
the police superintendent,
replacing him with
a new chief, veteran Eddie
Johnson.
And let's go to Chicago for
reactions to these
videos from Lori Lightfoot,
former chair of
the city's Police Accountability
Task Force.
It was formed by the mayor after
criticism
of the department and his
office. She's now
president of the Chicago Police
Board, an
independent civilian group
appointed by the
mayor.
And welcome to you.
Your task force had called for
this kind of
thing, the release of videos.
Why was it important
and why has it finally happened?
LORI LIGHTFOOT, President,
Chicago Police
Board: Well, it's important
because this information
from these incidents is
something that people
in the community care a lot
about.
They want to know what happened.
They want
to know what specific actions
police officers
have taken, and whether or not
those actions
are consistent with law, ethics
and respectful
of community engagement.
So moving this process forward
to this point
with the release of video, audio
and also
police reports is a very, very
important step
towards accountability and
really restoring
legitimacy of the police
department in a lot
of communities across Chicago.
JEFFREY BROWN: Is it possible to
say yet what
we have learned today from these
recordings,
either in terms of individual
cases or some
larger patterns or themes?
LORI LIGHTFOOT: I think it's too
soon to tell
that.
As the lead-in said, this is 101
cases. It's
a significant volume of data,
but I know people
are going to be spending time
going through
that, and I think we will learn
more about
it in the coming days. But I
think we should
focused on and emphasize the
point that Chicago
now becomes a leader in
transparency and putting
this kind of information out.
It is a very big and important
moment in our
history.
JEFFREY BROWN: We heard -- you
heard Sharon
Fairley talk about the
limitations of these
videos, in terms of how -- in
some cases how
much or how little it shows us.
Do you agree
with that, that we should be
careful in watching
them?
LORI LIGHTFOOT: I do agree with
that, because
the videos by definition are
going to capture
a particular snapshot in time
from a particular
perspective. They're not going
to tell the
entire story.
Now, many times, those videos
and the audio
will be meaningful and giving
the public an
understanding of what has
happened when. But
Sharon, I think, is 100 percent
right that
the public, while I think it's
important for
them to see this information,
see it in a
timely fashion, they have to
recognize that
it's not going to tell the
entire story in
every single case.
JEFFREY BROWN: What kind of
initial feedback,
if any, are you getting at this
point in the
community that was so eager for
something
like this?
LORI LIGHTFOOT: Well, I think
very positive.
Some of the folks who, frankly,
have been
the most critical of the police
department
and the city for not being
transparent, for
forcing folks to file either
FOIA requests
or, worse, lawsuits, I think,
are surprised
at the scope and the breadth of
this.
We announced this policy back in
February.
We're now at this moment, many
months later,
where the policy has actually
been given life.
And I hope that, on a
going-forward basis,
people recognize that once this
information
now becomes in the public view
on a regular
basis, that they will understand
better the
complexities and the nuances of
police encounters
in these very challenging
circumstances.
JEFFREY BROWN: The police union,
as we said
in our setup, is not happy with
this. I read
a quote to you from the head of
the union.
"The concern is that they're
putting this
out there and the officers' kids
and neighbors
are going to see it and we're
not getting
the entire incident."
Your reaction?
LORI LIGHTFOOT: Well, Dean
Angelo, unfortunately,
has been on the wrong side of
change and reform
really since the last six
months.
He made a lot of, I think,
unfortunate comments
about the release of the task
force report
and our recommendations. And I
think he's
wrong about this. In the long
run, being transparent
is something that actually, in
my view, will
aid the officers out there on
the street.
It will give the public context
for the tough
job that they have, the work
that they're
doing and, frankly, will be a
teaching moment
and opportunity for young
officers to look
at what their peers are doing in
different
circumstances and to really
learn from that
going forward.
It's unfortunate Dean Angelo and
the FOP really
seem fundamentally resistant to
change and
reform, but this is happening.
And it's going
happen whether or not they're on
the bus or
whether on the back end of the
bus or on the
street, but reform and change
has got to come.
JEFFREY BROWN: Just very
briefly, in 30 seconds,
if you could, your task force
had called for
-- had been very critical of the
police force.
Do you see changes taking place
yet?
LORI LIGHTFOOT: We see some
small steps in
the direction.
I think this is a really big,
important step,
but there is a lot more that
needs to be done.
And with anything that comes,
there's got
to be public engagement, there's
got to be
transparency, so that people
understand exactly
what's happening, they have an
opportunity
to give input. And that's the
only way legitimacy
is going to be established.
JEFFREY BROWN: Lori Lightfoot,
thank you very
much.
LORI LIGHTFOOT: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
controversial
tax to restore California's
wetlands; and
a restaurateur's journey in
discovering what
it means to be Asian-American.
But, first, to the analysis of
Shields and
Brooks. That's syndicated
columnist Mark Shields
and New York Times columnist
David Brooks,
our captains of civility, those
who disagree
agreeably.
Welcome back.
All right, so, first, there is
the story we
had about the longer-term kind
of pattern
of violence that is happening in
this presidential
campaign, and also the blame
game that's being
played by Trump supporters and
the protesters
outside, right, saying -- well,
what about
the political dimensions of
this?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, I think,
taken most immediately
San Jose last night and the
protest/violence
at the rally, the -- everything
I have been
able to find out, the
protesters, those who
are critical of Trump were the
ones -- certainly
not all of them -- but the
people who were
guilty of the violence, of
putting police
at risk, of trashing property
and so forth
were the protesters, the
anti-Trump people.
And, politically, the
consequence of this
is that they make Donald Trump
and his supporters
into the victims, and it hurts
-- quote -- "their
cause," if they have a cause, if
it's an anti-Trump
political cause. They end up
helping him,
because his hope is that it
creates sort of
this sense of things being out
of control,
events being out of control.
And that's the recipe: I'm the
strong man,
the authoritarian figure that
you need to
bring order to America.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, I guess I
semi-halfway
disagree.
I agree that the victims were
the Trump supporters.
That's clear from the videos
that we have
seen. Whether -- who it helps
and hurts, I
suspect it won't have a big
effect either
way, but you can argue it both
ways.
For Trump supporters, for people
who are pre-convinced
to support Donald Trump, it
vindicates a lot
of their world view. And so it
will solidify
his support.
But the only time I can really
think of political
violence really having a
political effect
was 1968 in Chicago.
MARK SHIELDS: Very much so.
DAVID BROOKS: And in that case,
it was sort
of intra-left, but it certainly
hurt the Democrats,
because there was an aura of
disarray.
And so one can see among
independent voters
and who are just nervous about
Trump as a
phenomenon, the fact that there
is all this
violence and all this drama
surrounding the
whole Trump phenomenon could be
nervous-making
and it could drive some people.
I doubt, either
way, it will have a massive
effect.
But it's just a bunch of young
thugs who like
to punch somebody.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We have always
had protests
as part of the political
discourse.
MARK SHIELDS: Oh, yes.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Every national
-- every
four years, there is the little
section for
the protesters at whatever
convention. This
just seems different.
MARK SHIELDS: I think it is.
I mean, I think Donald Trump,
it's part of
his shtick, is he plays to the
audience and
to those who do protest inside,
and don't
-- help him out, get him out of
here, that
is part of his routine, his
political routine,
and part of his political
appeal.
But that in no way justifies or
vindicates
putting police officers at risk
or attacking
other people physically.
DAVID BROOKS: This is a little
more like soccer
hooliganism to me. It's a group
of people
who like violence. They tend to
be young men.
And Trump happens to generate
this sort of
excitement that gives them a
pretext.
HARI SREENIVASAN: OK.
Earlier in the program, we had a
conversation
about the weak jobs report, the
weak recovery.
And there was actually an
interesting clip
that I want to play from the
town hall that
Gwen Ifill moderated with the
president in
Elkhart, Indiana.
When he was asked by someone,
insightfully,
if there's something that you
could change,
what would you change, here's
what he said.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
I think the thing I would have
probably done
differently is, I would have
tried to describe
earlier to the American people
how serious
the recession was going to be,
which is -- which
would have hopefully allowed us
to have an
even bigger response than we
did.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Mark?
MARK SHIELDS: I think he's
right.
If you look at the 21st century,
the first
eight years of the 21st century,
by Barack
Obama's election, there was a
net loss in
the creation of private jobs in
the United
States. I mean, so, for him to
really make
the case then, what we were
addressing then
was the crisis, the financial
crisis, people
losing their homes, in addition
to losing
their jobs and losing their life
savings,
but there was something
seriously wrong with
the economy, and it probably --
it was the
time when he could make the case
-- or should
have made the case -- for a
massive infrastructure,
for great public works
initiatives, to really
generate the economy in a
bigger, far more
bold way than he did.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Politically,
was that even
possible at the time?
DAVID BROOKS: I don't think so.
I think the
country cared as much as it
could over the
stimulus package.
I think we all knew how serious
it was at
the time. Everyone was in a
full-bore panic
in 2008, 2009. I do think they
could have
targeted the stimulus a little
differently.
And so what we're dealing with
now is this
long-term lack of people in the
labor force,
as David Wessel was saying. And
so there's
a lot of people who just not --
are not in
the habit of getting up, whose
skills have
become rusty.
And so when you have got people
who want to
hire, they still can't find
anybody. And if
we had taken some of the
stimulus money and
done some long-term investments
in that, maybe
that would have had some effect
on the labor
market, given people a few more
skills.
But I have to say, overall,
everyone had criticism
about the stimulus, the Fed's
reaction. Compared
to real-world countries, the
United States
got out of the recession faster
and better
than just about every other
country.
So I think historians will look
back -- and
we all have criticisms -- and
think that both
the Bush administration, the
Obama administration,
and the Fed did a realistically
decent job.
HARI SREENIVASAN: OK.
This week, a must-read was this
tiny paper
from Janesville, Wisconsin, I
think, a gazette,
right, where there was an op-ed.
This is where
-- I think we have a quote we
can put up on
screen.
This is Paul Ryan finally gave
his endorsement:
"It's no secret that he and I
have our differences,
but the reality is, on the
issues that make
up our agenda, we have more
common ground
than disagreement."
This is somebody who was almost,
looks like,
kicked dragging and screaming
into this word,
endorsement. And at the same
time, the next
day, today, he comes out and
says, listen,
I don't agree with what the
presumptive nominee
is doing and saying about a
judge in a case
that's being litigated.
MARK SHIELDS: Paul Ryan
obviously cares more
about the House majority than he
does his
legacy as a disciple of Jack
Kemp and the
-- his mentor and in many
respects his idol
politically. I think that's the
calculation
he has made.
I mean, this is a man who is
close to Mitt
Romney. Donald Trump calls Mitt
Romney a loser,
walks like a penguin, ridicules
him, just
terribly offensive and vulgar
stuff about
him. But Paul Ryan knows that,
if there's
going to be a Republican
majority -- or is
convinced if there is going to
be a Republican
majority next January, that the
only way to
do it, he needs Trump voters to
vote for Republican
candidates.
So he's made this deal, sadly
for him, because
he's going to be spending the
next five months
-- speaker of the judge case, do
you agree
with what Donald Trump said
today in Boise,
Idaho? Did you agree what he
said yesterday
in Hartford, Connecticut? That's
-- he has
got a steady diet of answering
phone calls
and questions about does he
agree and where
he does disagree.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We have heard
that Karl
Rove had a meeting with Trump.
Does this just mean that
basically the Republicans
are all just going to get in
line and say,
all right, this is our guy,
we're going to
have to back him?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, it looks like
-- it looks
that way. They won't be happen,
but they will
do it.
I think, morally, it was a sad
day for Paul
Ryan to do that. I don't think
his principles
are there in what he said. I
think, politically,
it was also a sad day. If Donald
Trump hangs
in and is competitive in the
fall, then maybe
what Paul Ryan did will be good
for the House
Republicans.
But Donald Trump is the
definition of downside.
Lots of bad things could happen,
and he could
do horribly. And if he does
horribly in the
fall, it would have been nice if
Republicans
could say, we have got some
distance between
us and that guy.
And you could get a lot of
people who would
not vote for Donald Trump be a
lot happier
about voting for Republicans
down-ballot.
So, I think some distance would
have been
better than this plea for unity.
MARK SHIELDS: Well, I would just
add one thing,
Hari. And that is, I don't think
Republicans
are falling in.
I think there was sort of a post
his victory
lap. And people -- I think you
have seen a
deafening silence this week
among Republicans.
After Senator -- Secretary
Clinton's speech,
there was no rush of surrogates
to defend
him. There was no Chairman Bob
Corker of the
Foreign Relations Committee come
out saying,
this is unfair, Donald Trump
makes sense.
He is very much the lone ranger
on the judge.
I mean, there has been nobody
who has stood
with him as he has accused this
judge of having
Mexican heritage somehow
influencing his rulings
in the Trump University case.
This is a man who was a federal
prosecutor.
There was a death contract put
on him, or
a kill contract, by a drug
cartel he was prosecuting
before his appointment to the
judgeship.
He -- I think Trump is basically
by himself
this week among other
Republicans.
DAVID BROOKS: The Republicans
have eyes.
Trump has had a very bad week, a
really bad
week, the Trump University,
those comments,
the riots, the Hillary Clinton
speech. This
is not a guy who's sort of on
the offensive
anymore. And Republicans can see
that. But
that doesn't mean they're not
going to say,
oh, yes, I'm basically endorsing
him, even
if they do it from a small
newspaper far away.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Let's take a
-- that speech
that you guys are referencing
seemed like
a new line of attack that the
Clinton campaign
has picked up on, because
previous attacks
-- and I don't know if this is
going to be
effective or not -- but didn't
seem to work
as well.
Let's take a look at the video.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
This is not someone who should
ever have the
nuclear codes, because it's not
hard to imagine
Donald Trump leading us into a
war just because
somebody got under his very thin
skin.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Will this
work?
MARK SHIELDS: I think it will
work.
I think, first of all, Secretary
Clinton was
better yesterday than I have
seen her in the
entire campaign. She seemed more
comfortable
doing it.
She -- if you recall, John Kerry
was put on
the defensive in the '04
campaign by saying,
actually, I did vote for the $87
billion in
aid to Afghanistan and Iraq
before I voted
against it.
There's nothing like hanging
someone on their
own words. Mitt Romney had 47
percent people,
I don't have to worry about them
because they're
dependent on the government, in
2012.
That's what she did it
yesterday. And she
did it effectively. She did it
with Trump's
own words. And I don't think
there's any question
she elevated the spirits of
dispirited Democrats.
I think it's an alarm, an
exhortation to Sanders
voters that this campaign is
very important.
I think it probably also reaches
to California
primary voters, where she's in a
-- the fight
of her life for California next
Tuesday.
And, finally, she got under
Donald Trump's
skin. So, I think, on all four
counts, it
probably was a very positive day
for Secretary
Clinton.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, I agree it
was her best
speech of the campaign, I
thought.
And I would add a few more
counts. It was
very good for independent
voters, because
it is not an ideological
left-right attack
on Trump. It's, this guy's
unstable. And that's
something -- doesn't matter what
you believe.
You can buy that argument.
And she did it in a way without
sinking to
his level. And that was
something -- a problem
that Marco Rubio and other
opponents have
had. They get in the gutter with
him. But
she did it from a haughty,
contemptuous, serious
way, really. And so I thought it
was quite
a compelling speech.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Technically,
that's the
kind of -- the meta look, is,
essentially,
do you have to change the tone
of the debate,
does it have to become more
coarse, does it
have to become more personal?
And this is technically before
they're both
presumptive nominees or leaders.
But they're
not even the candidates yet, and
we're already
seeing this basically go
negative.
DAVID BROOKS: Well, we're going
to see that
when you have two unpopular
candidates, as
we're going to see.
But how you go negative and
whether she would
get dragged down was the real
challenge. And
she struck the right note. In
politics, the
lows are lower than the highs
are highs. When
somebody makes a mistake, it's
much worse
than the benefits when they do
something right.
And so people, voters are very
nervous about
politicians who seem unstable
and disordered.
And Trump -- she's painting
Trump as unstable
and disordered. And that plucks
at something
that genuinely has had a lot of
resonance
in fall elections.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
No, I think it's going to be
that kind of
a campaign. It's -- you want the
focus on
your opponent and your
opponent's shortcomings.
And I think she put it squarely
there yesterday.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Mark Shields,
David Brooks, thanks so much.
Next Tuesday, San Francisco
residents will
vote on a ballot measure
regarding funding
to preserve and restore Bay Area
wetlands.
Many in the tech and
environmental communities,
including youth volunteers, have
lined up
to support the bill. However,
not all voters
believe that the proposed tax is
the solution.
This story comes from special
correspondent
Sonia Aronson at Media
Enterprise Alliance
in Oakland, part of our network
of Student
Reporting Labs.
WOMAN: Welcome to the Oakland
shoreline. This
is Martin Luther King Jr.
Regional Park.
SONIA ARONSON, Media Enterprise
Alliance:
These local high school students
have volunteered
their Saturday to clean up the
San Francisco
Bay.
CHRIS LA, Volunteer, Save the
Bay: We are
helping restore and replant and
reinstall
native plants into this area of
the wetlands.
SONIA ARONSON: They are here
with Save the
Bay, a local organization that
mobilizes the
community to restore the
thousands of acres
of wetlands surrounding the bay.
They also educate volunteers and
student groups
like this one about the crucial
role that
wetlands play in sustaining the
bay.
Chris La is a sophomore at
Oakland High School.
CHRIS LA: We should be connected
to our environment,
because that's what we should be
worried about
first. Without the world,
without nature,
we wouldn't be here. And we're
slowly doing
a better job at sustaining
ourselves, but,
so far, we kind of screwed up
over the last
200 years.
SONIA ARONSON: In that time, the
wetlands
that surround the bay have been
disappearing
at an alarming rate, which could
endanger
not just the local ecosystem,
but the worldwide
effort to address global warming
and sea level
rise.
PATTY OIKAWA, University of
California, Berkeley:
So, originally, this was all
wetlands. About
150 years ago, people came in
and drained
those wetlands and started
growing crops like
corn and alfalfa.
SONIA ARONSON: Patty Oikawa, a
postdoctoral
researcher at U.C. Berkeley, is
studying the
unique ability of wetlands to
store carbon,
a trait that can offset the
effects of climate
change.
PATTY OIKAWA: It's definitely
carbon-rich.
SONIA ARONSON: Oikawa and her
team are here
in the San Joaquin River Delta
east of San
Francisco measuring levels of
carbon beneath
the surface of this wetland.
In the process, they are getting
a sense of
just how effective this
ecosystem can be.
PATTY OIKAWA: What we can now
say is that
we're taking up approximately
400 or 500 grams
of carbon per square meter per
year. And that's
a really high amount of carbon
storage, equivalent
to like a tropical rain forest
even. It's
extremely productive.
SONIA ARONSON: Oikawa's research
shows how
the wetlands play a crucial role
in sustaining
the health of coastal areas, but
due to continued
development, these wetlands are
in greater
danger than ever.
PATTY OIKAWA: These systems tend
to be near
rivers or near the coast, which
are areas
that are highly impacted by
people in California,
highly developed areas, which is
why we have
lost 90 percent of them.
SONIA ARONSON: Today, San
Francisco Bay is
only one-third its original size
and only
a fraction of the original
wetlands remain.
But this degradation has not
gone unnoticed.
A new ballot initiative being
pushed by local
environmental and business
groups may help.
This June, voters in nine Bay
Area counties
will vote on Measure AA, a
proposed parcel
tax to raise funds for wetlands
restoration
and other work to protect the
bay.
Save the Bay is one of the
organizations pushing
this idea. David Lewis is Save
the Bay's executive
director:
DAVID LEWIS, Executive Director,
Save the
Bay: We have more than 30,000
acres that are
waiting to be restored to tidal
marsh. And
the missing ingredient is
funding. With the
funds generated from this parcel
tax, from
Measure AA, we will be able to
accelerate
wetland restoration and get all
these benefits
in the next 10 or 20 years.
SONIA ARONSON: Measure AA
proposes a $12-per-year
property tax on each parcel of
land in the
nine counties surrounding the
San Francisco
Bay.
It would raise $500 million for
bay restoration
over the next 20 years. The
measure requires
a two-thirds majority to pass, a
high bar
for a new tax, but a broad
coalition of support
has gathered behind the measure,
including
some of the biggest companies in
Silicon Valley.
The Silicon Valley Leadership
Group, a trade
organization that represents
more than 390
businesses, including Apple and
Google, is
advocating for passage of the
parcel tax.
But some groups believe that the
parcel tax
doesn't represent the diverse
interests of
the Bay Area.
Wendy Lack is a research
assistant for the
Contra Costa Taxpayers
Association.
WENDY LACK, Contra Costa
Taxpayers Association:
We don't believe it's good value
for taxpayers.
There's a lack of oversight
regarding how
the funds would be spent. In
fact, we don't
know how it will be spent. And
it expands
regional government. We believe
that government
is best when it's local,
accessible, directly
elected, and available to
people.
SONIA ARONSON: Critics also
point out that
the $12 parcel tax would make a
small homeowner
pay the same amount as the owner
of a San
Francisco high-rise, or a
Silicon Valley corporate
office.
But local government officials,
such as Libby
Schaaf, the mayor of Oakland,
say voters should
support Measure AA for the
benefit of future
generations.
LIBBY SCHAAF, Mayor of Oakland,
California:
We have got to pay attention to
our wetlands
and how it sustains an ecosystem
that is critical
not just for environmental
health, but for
our health, and particularly for
the future
generations that deserve to
inherit a Bay
Area that is a healthy Bay Area.
SONIA ARONSON: Back at the Save
the Bay work
day, youth are already working
to create a
healthier bay, one native plant
at a time.
CHRIS LA: I know that a lot of
people are
passionate, especially young
people. We can't
reverse what we have done, but
what can slow
it down, and maybe find a
solution.
SONIA ARONSON: I'm Sonia Aronson
for the "PBS
NewsHour" Student Reporting Labs
in Oakland,
California.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Finally
tonight: on food,
family, and knowing who you are,
a "NewsHour"
bookshelf conversation with chef
Eddie Huang.
Jeffrey Brown is back to get a
taste.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, what do we
have here?
EDDIE HUANG, Author, "Double Cup
Love": This
is a new bao. This is our
dumpling bao, which
I like a lot. So you could try
that one. Then
this is the Chairman Bao that
we're most known
for.
JEFFREY BROWN: These days, Eddie
Huang is
known for a lot of things. His
hole-in-the-wall
restaurant in downtown
Manhattan, Baohaus,
packs in crowds for lunch and
late into the
evening. The specialty here is
pork buns,
or baos, but Huang says it's
really about
much more.
EDDIE HUANG: I know the food's
great and I
love it and it represents so
much of who I
am, but what I'm really pushing
is community
in New York, because I think the
purpose of
restaurants is to distribute
culture.
JEFFREY BROWN: Distribute
culture?
EDDIE HUANG: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Which means food
and more.
EDDIE HUANG: Food and, you know,
just personality
and values and the way we're
treating each
other.
JEFFREY BROWN: He's now
exploring global food
culture on a global scale, Eddie
style, in
a Viceland TV show called
"Huang's World."
Outside the restaurant recently,
we talked
about Eddie Huang's world.
EDDIE HUANG: I think all my work
is really
rebelling against the matrix
that's trying
to normalize us and create
monoculture. And
the funniest, most rewarding
part about it
is, all I have to do is be
myself. And that's
all anybody has to do.
Everybody's kind of
strange, you know?
JEFFREY BROWN: But when you were
growing up,
that was hard.
EDDIE HUANG: It's very hard.
JEFFREY BROWN: Because you were
different.
EDDIE HUANG: Yes, it's very hard
when you
are in a community that doesn't
allow you
to be yourself.
JEFFREY BROWN: Huang grew up in
Orlando, Florida,
the son of Taiwanese immigrants
who opened
a Western-style steakhouse and
other restaurants.
On one Vice episode, he went
back home to
celebrate Chinese new year.
EDDIE HUANG: Everything I
learned is from
my mom. I said to myself when I
was like 12
or 13, man, I have got to start
learning all
these dishes and remembering
them.
WOMAN: I don't teach him. He
steal from me.
EDDIE HUANG: Oh!
JEFFREY BROWN: He wrote of his
childhood in
the memoir "Fresh Off the Boat,"
but there
was much darkness along with the
humor, as
he struggled for acceptance.
EDDIE HUANG: In Orlando growing
up, it was
extremely hard. I had to fight
just to like
stand up on my own two feet. I
got pushed
down in school. People always
wanted to fight
me. People always had something
to say about
Chinamen.
I remember playing little league
baseball
and these kids, after every
practice and game,
would run in a circle around me
saying ching-chong,
Eddie Huang sitting on a jungle
gong. And
like, you know, everybody
laughed. And I was
like, this sucks.
JEFFREY BROWN: The ABC sitcom
based on the
book was mostly played for
laughs, too much
so for Huang, who was involved
early on, but
later publicly criticized the
program.
EDDIE HUANG: I wasn't happy with
the sitcom.
Even sometimes now, when I just
read about
the sitcom and the references
they're using,
you know, it -- it will bother
me at times,
but I have been able to
understand the purpose
that that show serves.
JEFFREY BROWN: Which is what?
EDDIE HUANG: We just needed to
get on base.
You know, we needed to get on
base. There
wasn't a sitcom with Asians that
you could
watch anywhere on American
television.
We didn't have representation.
And while a
sitcom isn't the end-all/be-all
of identity
and representation in America,
it's a big
step.
JEFFREY BROWN: Huang traveled to
China for
his new book, a second memoir,
"Double Cup
Love." The subtitle says it all,
"On the Trail
of Family, Food, and Broken
Hearts in China."
EDDIE HUANG: I kind of wanted to
go home and
see if I was actually Chinese.
JEFFREY BROWN: You wanted to see
if you were
Chinese?
EDDIE HUANG: I wanted to go back
to the motherland
and see, like, if I fit their
definition of
what it meant to be Chinese.
Like, would I
be accepted?
In a lot of ways, too, it's like
cooking engagement
chicken for your, like,
ancestral history.
You know what I mean? Like, it
was my proposal
to my Chinese identity. Like, am
I good enough?
Will you have me?
JEFFREY BROWN: And what
happened? What did
you find?
EDDIE HUANG: A funny thing
happened.
It was a very Jedi maneuver that
China pulled
on me, which is, when you ask a
question,
it didn't give you an answer.
The answer was,
really, you're asking the wrong
question.
Every dish you make, it's almost
problem-solving,
right?
And I was almost asking, like,
am I solving
this problem like a Chinese
person?
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
EDDIE HUANG: It's like, dude,
you are -- you
are Chinese. The problem is, how
do I make
beef noodle soup? You came up
with your solution.
It's delicious, it's great, and
it's unlike
anybody else's solution here in
China, because
your experience has been
different.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, you even
say: I'm Chinese,
but I grew up in America. What
if I'm a fraud?
Why is that such a theme for
you?
EDDIE HUANG: Because, in a lot
of ways, I
feel like this generation of
Asian-Americans
are frontiersmen.
We're the first generation, a
lot of times,
that's been born here and has to
deal with
not growing up in your ancestral
homeland
or something close to it and
trying to reconcile
that. And because you don't have
role models,
because you don't have people,
you know, that
have done it before you, there's
a bit of
fear.
There's a bit of like, am I
doing this right?
Am I a fraud? And I think it is
one of those
essential questions that every
Asian-American
kid this generation asks
themselves.
JEFFREY BROWN: Where do you see
the portrayal
of Asian-Americans in popular
culture in the
media today? Has that improved?
EDDIE HUANG: I think that we're
finally starting
to ask very important questions
about accuracy,
authenticity, and specificity.
JEFFREY BROWN: You're a writer,
cook, television
personality, I guess. How do you
-- how do
you define yourself these days?
EDDIE HUANG: yes, I tell people
a lot like
I really love Emerson's
"American Scholar."
I learned a lot from it.
JEFFREY BROWN: Ralph Waldo
Emerson.
EDDIE HUANG: Yes.
And I remember he said, you're
not a farmer,
you're a man farming. And so I
have never
allowed people to identify me
as, you're a
chef, or you're a writer, or
you're a host.
Let's not pigeonhole me. And I
hope other
people will do that as well for
themselves,
because you're much more than
just the things
that you do, much more than just
the work,
you know?
JEFFREY BROWN: From Baohaus in
Lower Manhattan,
I'm Jeffrey Brown for the "PBS
NewsHour."
HARI SREENIVASAN: A quick news
update before
we go tonight.
There's word that the family of
boxing legend
Muhammad Ali is gathering at his
bedside at
a Phoenix area hospital. The
74-year-old former
heavyweight champion was
hospitalized Thursday
for a respiratory condition
complicated by
the Parkinson's disease he's
been battling
for three decades.
On the "NewsHour" online right
now: Some 125
American troops lost their lives
in two offensives
in the city of Fallujah in 2004.
Now a much
smaller number of U.S. forces
are back for
what promises to be another ugly
battle. Foreign
affairs correspondent Margaret
Warner examines
why the return to Fallujah has
provoked some
anger and frustration.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And Gwen Ifill is preparing for
"Washington
Week," which airs tonight on
PBS, and has
this preview -- Gwen.
GWEN IFILL: Thanks, Hari.
Tonight, we dig deep into the
state of the
2016 race, what Hillary Clinton
is saying
about Donald Trump, what Trump
has to say
about Clinton, and what Bernie
Sanders has
to say about them both. Does any
of it matter?
Plus, more on my conversation
with President
Obama this week in Elkhart,
Indiana -- all
that tonight on "Washington
Week" -- Hari.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Thanks, Gwen.
On "PBS NewsHour Weekend"
tomorrow: inside
the growing economy of the
world's largest
Syrian refugee camp.
NARRATOR: An hour's drive from
Jordan's capital
of Amman, this family-owned
pastry shop called
Farouk Sweets (ph) looks like a
typical Middle
Eastern bakery.
Customers stock up on pastries
for the weekend.
In the back, five bakers are
busy filling
large wedding orders. What's
unusual is that
this shop is inside Zaatari, the
largest Syrian
refugee camp in the world,
spread over three
square miles of desert.
When they first arrived,
refugees thought
it would be for just a few
weeks, maybe a
month. But that stay has lasted
longer than
anyone expected, five years and
counting.
That means, for many, opening up
small businesses,
just like they did back home.
There's a supermarket,
a pizza place, a falafel stand,
a gardening
shop, and a store to rent bridal
gowns.
HARI SREENIVASAN: That's
tomorrow night on
"PBS NewsHour Weekend."
And we will be back right here
on Monday with
a look at the new kicks on Route
66, the iconic
U.S. highway from Chicago to
Santa Monica.
That's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm Hari
Sreenivasan. Have a great
weekend. Thank you,
and good night.